It's a real privilege to be speaking to you today and I just pray that God will really touch your hearts through what we hear this morning.
I'm going to be speaking about Moses and he was the most incredible man.
Films have been made about him, stories have been told.
He was at incredible, someone who
took 2.4 million people or maybe even 3 million people out of slavery in Egypt and threw on their journey towards the promised land.
And so he is a man of faith, a man of power.
And this morning we're going to be looking at the journey he had to do
as he began to step into that role and the things that he struggled with and hopefully we can learn some things for ourselves too.
Lord, we just thank you for your presence here this morning.
We thank you for your word, which is so powerful and brings so much joy and help to us.
Lord, we just pray that we'll be able to take in those bits that you really want us to focus on this morning.
in Jesus' name.
Amen.
So Moses was born at a very difficult time and he was born in Egypt.
And it was a time when the Pharaoh was really feeling the pressure of having all these amazing Hebrew Jewish people living in his land.
They were multiplying quickly and he began to feel really threatened by them.
And so he decided, first of all, to make slaves of them.
And secondly, when that didn't seem to have much effect, he commanded the midwives to kill all the baby boys as they were being born.
And this is the time that Moses was born.
And his parents kept him for about three months, and then they knew they'd be found.
And in the end,
that would be the end of their baby.
So they made a little basket for him and put him in the Nile and left him there with only his sister keeping a knife from the banks of the river.
And it was an incredible story.
I'm sure you know it where the princess, the Muthis, comes down and she's bathing and she hears this baby crying and she goes to pick him up and something about that baby
connects with her and she decides that she will take him as her own son as she hadn't got any children so far.
And so Moses was brought up by his adopted mother in a foreign land, foreign to his own family anyway in Egypt.
And Steven says,
in his account of Moses in Acts chapter seven.
Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in word and in speech and action.
So he was brought up completely differently to the rest of his family.
He had privilege, he had education and he had a lot of charm about him too.
The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus describes Moses as being particularly intelligent, he says.
Now Moses' understanding became superior to his age, far beyond that standard.
And when he was taught, he discovered greater quickness of apprehension than was usual at his age.
And his actions at that time
promise greater when he should come to the age of a man.
God did also give him that tallness when he was about three years old as was wonderful.
So he was an outstanding child right from the beginning.
Josephus also describes a military campaign which Moses led in his, I don't know when he was 20s or whatever,
And he led the Egyptian army in a battle to kind of keep them safe because the Ethiopians kept attacking them and taking their land.
So he was incredible.
He was absolutely incredible.
I find it really interesting that the Bible doesn't tell us those stories and Josephus has to tell us.
And it makes me smile really.
I used to read this sentence in Numbers 12, verse 3, which says, now Moses was a very humble man, more humble than anyone else on the face of the earth.
And it made me smile.
And I think about Hercule Poirot, when Hastings is trying to talk to him, trying to tell him he needs to be a bit more humble, because he always thought he was the best
and detective in the whole world and you say, I am learning.
I shall be the most humble person in the world.
No one will match Hercule Poirot for his humbility and it just, it seems strange to me that these stories about Moses, about his greatness, his power and authority were not included in the Bible but then I think, well,
Moses actually is a trip, the first five books that the Bible called the Pentateuch was mainly written by Moses.
And actually, he never mentions these.
So maybe he was really genuinely a humble person.
So at the beginning of Exodus, we see Moses as a man who wanted to help his people.
He had this inner connection
with the Hebrews, and he hated to see them being treated so badly by their slave masters.
And one day, his anger just got the better of him.
And ultimately, he just killed the Egyptian who was threatening the Hebrew.
He killed him, and I think crumbs.
He must have been really strong, mustn't he?
You know, to be able to do that, there's no mention of any problem in doing it.
He killed the Egyptian.
And this was one of those occasions where Moses' anger got the better of him.
Moses was not a perfect person, just like us.
And he had times where his anger got the better of him further on as he led the people later.
Anyway, he thought that no one had seen him kill that Egyptian.
But the next day he went out and there were two of his own people, Hebrews, fighting each other.
And he says, come on guys, you are both Hebrews.
Why are you doing this to each other?
And they turn around and say to him, who's made you leader over us?
Do you going to kill us like you killed the Egyptian?
And suddenly Moses knew that he had been seen and that this would lead to quite serious action.
So he runs away.
And he goes into Midian.
He becomes a shepherd.
He marries a lady who's a shepherd.
And he is there for 40
years, 40 years.
How incredible.
This man who had so much potential and so much power spent 40 years of his life just looking after sheep.
However, God had his hand on him.
He'd had his hand on him right from the beginning and
We probably all know the story of the burning bush, but I will just kind of refresh us.
Moses was looking after the sheep and he goes out into the wilderness and he sees this bush that is on fire and he hears God speaking to him out of the bush.
So when the Lord saw that he had gone over to look, God called to him from within the bush, Moses, Moses,
And Moses said, here I am.
Do not come any closer, God said.
Take off your sandals for the place where your standing is holy ground.
Then he said, I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
At this, Moses hid his face because he was afraid to look at God.
The Lord said,
I have indeed seen the misery of my people in Egypt.
I've heard them crying out because of their slave drivers, and I am concerned about their suffering.
So I've come down to rescue them from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land into a good and spacious land, a land flowing with milk and honey, the home of all the Iats.
Now,
The cry of the Israelite has reached me, and I've seen the way the Egyptians are oppressing them.
So now go, I am sending you to Pharaoh to bring my people the Israelites out of Egypt.
But Moses said to God, who am I that I should go to Pharaoh and bring the Israelites out of Egypt?
And God said, I will be with you.
Amazing.
that he had this encounter with God.
Even more amazing was that he was being sent by God to do the most incredible miracles and wonders to bring the people out of Egypt into their promised land.
And here he is saying, who am I?
Who am I that I should do this?
And he has at this stage
You can sense that he has lost all his self-esteem.
He's forgotten about the times when he led our an army.
He's forgotten about the times when he was clever and knew a lot of things.
And now he's going, who am I?
And his low self-esteem could well have stopped him from stepping into the story that God had for him.
But I feel like there's something else in that when he says, who am I?
It's like he's lost his sense of identity.
It's like he doesn't know who he is anymore.
And when you think about it, he might kind of been saying, who am I, an Egyptian prince, a general in the Egyptian army?
Am I a murderer?
Because I killed that Egyptian.
Am I a Hebrew or am I just a shepherd?
He didn't know who he was.
And I think that's another thing that can stop us from stepping into the story that God has for us, isn't it?
And then he went on to other fears and excuses of why he couldn't do this.
Chapter four verse one says, what if they don't believe me or listen to me?
He's afraid that he will have a battle.
He feels he can't do it.
They're not going to respect him.
And he has all this stuff going on in his head.
And it could be the memories of killing the Egyptian.
It could be all sorts of things.
He was afraid that the people would not receive him as their leader.
And so we read in Exodus 4,
verses 10 to 13, Moses said to the Lord, pardon your servant, Lord, I have never been eloquent, neither in the past nor since you have spoken to your servant.
I am slow of speech and tongue.
The Lord said to him, who gave human beings their mouths?
Who made them deaf or mute?
Who gives them sight or makes them blind?
Is it not I, the Lord?
Now go, I will help you speak.
and teach you what to say.
But Moses said, pardon your servant Lord, please send someone else.
I so relate to Moses.
He had come to such a low point that he didn't think he could actually do what God had told him to do.
And he's just saying, I really don't want the job.
Lord, I don't want the job.
I don't want to do it.
I'm sure you could find someone else who would be a lot better.
And he could have had other excuses that he didn't actually say at this time.
I mean, the guy was 80 years old when he started this journey.
I'm old, Lord.
I'm tired.
I don't want to do this.
And there's so many things that could have stopped him.
from stepping into the story that God had for him.
And to be fair to him, when he did take the job on, he had endless difficulties, frustrations, things going wrong, people blaming him for taking them out there, asking, where can they get water from?
One particular time, they said, oh, you shouldn't have brought us out of Egypt.
We had meat to eat in Egypt.
We want meat.
We want meat and poor Moses.
There's this whole bit in numbers.
I will read this to you.
I know time's a bit short, but I will read this.
Numbers 11, 10 to 15.
This is a conversation that Moses has with God.
Moses heard the people of every family wailing at the entrance to their tents.
The Lord became exceedingly angry and Moses was troubled.
He asked the Lord, why have you brought this trouble on your servant?
What have I done to displease you that you have put the burden of all these people on me?
Did I conceive these people?
Did I give them birth?
Why do you tell me to carry them in my arms?
And he goes on, he has a real old moan about the situation that he's having to face at that time.
It was difficult.
And sometimes he wanted to just pack up and go and leave that job and give them all back to God and just have a nice life.
And we're like that, frankly, aren't we?
So how did Moses, what made Moses the person that he really was, the person
that God saw him to be.
What made him that person was his passion for God, his passion to be in the presence of God, to spend time with God.
And we see this so beautifully in Exodus 33.
And it says, now Moses used to take a tent and pitch it outside the camp some distance away calling it the tent of meeting.
Anyone inquiring of the Lord would go to the tent of meeting outside the camp.
And whenever Moses went to the tent, the people rose and stood at the entrance to their tents, watching Moses until he entered the tent.
As Moses went into the tent, the pillar of cloud would come down and stay at the entrance while the Lord spoke with Moses.
Whenever the people saw the pillar of clouds standing at the entrance to the tent, they all stood up worshiped.
each at the entrance to their tent.
The Lord would speak to Moses face to face as one speaks to a friend.
And Moses said to the Lord, you have been telling me, lead these people, but you have not let me know whom you will send with me.
You have said, I know you by name and you have found favor with me.
If you are pleased with me, teach me,
your ways so that I may know you and continue to find favor with you.
Remember that this nation is your people.
The Lord replied, my presence will go with you and I will give you rest.
And Moses said to him, if your presence does not go with us, do not send us up from here.
His heart was so much for the presence of God.
And that's what caused him to step into this difficult story at a difficult time, face those challenges and overcome them.
The amazing thing was his heart for God.
He had such a heart for God.
He used to love to spend time in God's presence
He went up the mountain one time.
He was there for 40 days and 40 nights.
Wow, what a man.
Bill Johnson writes in his book, Face to Face with God.
Moses was hungry for God alone, not merely for what God could do to make him successful.
He insisted on following the presence of God himself, saying, if your presence does not go with us, do not lead us up from here.
Moses was the great leader he was because he was not focused on personal success, but on the God who could be known.
Moses preferred the wilderness with God to the promised land without God.
Do you know you and I, we can make excuses.
All the excuses we like for not fully following the plan that God has for us, for not fully stepping into the story he has for us.
Or we can choose like Moses to lay those excuses down and focus on God himself.
If we make his presence our aim and chief joy in life, there will be no limit what he can do in us and through us.
The thing that stops most of us from stepping fully into this plans and story that God has for us is our own self.
We are all basically selfish.
We all want to be free from burdens and stress and people and difficulties.
It's hard sometimes.
The challenges we face, and I know, Pete and Nikki, they have a lot of challenges in leading this church and the network, but they have chosen to make God their focus.
They are worshipers, first and foremost.
And I hope that that is all of our hearts as we sit under their leadership.
There are some very challenging verses in the Bible that we prefer not to talk about, but they are then on the left.
And Jesus said, if you're going to follow me, you can't love your father or your mother or your parents, your children,
I have to be number one.
He says, whoever does not take up their cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
Whoever finds their life will lose it and whoever loses their life, for my sake will find it.
We're not actually called to have a comfortable life.
we are called to do whatever God tells us to do.
Like Moses, we might not think that's what we want to do initially.
But if we will say yes to God, if we will spend time in His presence as of the first priority in our lives, if we will listen to Him, and if we will not make all the excuses
same we're too tired, too old, too this, too that, whatever.
Who knows what God could do with us if we're willing to lie, lay our lives down?
If we're willing to let God, as He did with Moses, take us to a place where it's not going to be about us.
It's all going to be about God and His glory.
He wants to empty us of ourselves.
so that we can be so full of God, that we can carry his presence wherever we go and make a difference.
Smith Wigglesworth said, the striking thing about Moses is that it took him 40 years to learn human wisdom, 40 years to know his helplessness, and 40 years to live in the power of God.
FB Maya in his wonderful book about Moses says, and what is this faith?
Is it not some inherent power or quality in certain men by virtue of which they are able to accomplish special results unrealized by others?
It is rather the power of putting self aside that God may work unhindered through nature.
God cannot give his glory to another.
He dare not trust his power to men till they are humbled and emptied and conscious of their helplessness.
Even the sun learned obedience through what he suffered.
You must be brought to an end of yourself before God can begin with you.
But when once you have come to that point, there is no limit to what can be wrought
during a single life by the passage through it of his eternal power and Godhead.
I really used to love listening when I was a student to Andrei Crouch and the disciples, and they had some beautiful songs, but there was one.
And it said, all to Jesus, I surrender.
All to him I freely gave.
I will ever love and trust him in his presence daily live.
I surrender all.
All to Jesus.
I surrender.
I surrender all."
And another song said, all that I am and ever hope to be.
I owe it all to thee.
Last week Pete was talking about giving.
And there's a beautiful verse in 2 Corinthians 8 verse 5.
And Paul is writing to the church in Corinth and telling them about the extreme generosity of the Macedonians.
And he said, they gave as much as they were able.
And even beyond their ability, they exceeded our expectations.
They gave themselves.
First of all to the Lord.
Today, I just feel like this is giving Sunday.
Have we given all of ourself to God?
God wants us to do that.
We can be so incredibly blessed if we would just step out of our comfort zone and just follow what He tells us to do, what He shows us to do, the things He lays on our hearts.
I feel like he just wants us to give our whole self to him this morning, not holding anything back, but just say, God, here I am.
You gave everything for me, and I want to give everything for you.
I also feel like God wants to help us when we get to that place, when we say, who am I, Lord?
Who am I?
We can put ourselves down and we can make ourselves too big.
But who am I?
How does God see each one of us?
We all have unique gifts.
We all have unique abilities that God has put in us.
We need Him to show us those things.
Who am I?
But there's another aspect as well.
We need to know who God says we are from his word.
When Jesus started his ministry just before he was baptized and he heard these words spoken over him, this is my son whom I love and with him I am well pleased.
At that point Jesus has done nothing apart from carpentry.
When we know that we are God's child, we are made in his image.
There's no mistakes in the way he put us together.
We're all unique.
When we know that we are his, his chosen child, his chosen person, we can carry his presence with us in whatever we do.
We can know
that he is pleased with us.
He says that over each of us, not because of great things we've done already.
He says that because he loves us.
And everything in our past does not have to determine where we will end up.
Look at Moses.
He wasn't perfect.
He had a hard time, had a difficult childhood.
I don't know how he coped.
knowing that he's been brought up as a prince in this royal palace, but actually his real family were living in probably poverty and squalor.
How did he cope with that?
But God sees us in Christ, and he sees Christ in us.
He has put his spirit in us.
We are all new creations when we come to Him.
The old has gone.
The new has come.
Let God show you.
Let Him show you who He has made you to be.
And when you know who you are, you will find the path that He has marked out for you.
You will be able to step into the story that He has specifically for you.
God loves us so, so much.
And he wants to develop his character in us.
He wants to make us like Jesus.
But the journey is not always easy.
I'm not going to stand up here and lie to you.
The journey of becoming like Jesus.
where all our faults and failures he gently shows us and he gently teaches us how to become more like Jesus.
We are his children.
He has got plans for each one of you in this room.
Don't ever say, I'm only or just.
Always say, I am a child of God.
He loves me and he is pleased with me.
and he wants the very, very best for me, even though it might be a painful journey.
God has got so much that he wants to do with each one of you.
I just pray that you will know who he says you are and that you will go out giving your whole self to him today and just take off yourself, all those labels that people have put on you over the years.
Maybe things that are even good about you, but you don't feel comfortable with them.
It doesn't feel like your heart.
Some people have been trapped by things others have said over them.
I had a friend and she kept telling me how shy she was.
And I kept thinking I don't see really a shy person here, but I didn't know what to say, so I didn't.
At some point, she realized that that label had been stuck on her from an early age.
And actually, although it had been true back then, it wasn't true anymore.
And once she took that label off herself, she was able to train and become a Baptist minister.
What is holding you back today?
What holds us back?
Is it the things people have said?
Is it our own self-esteem, our own picture of ourself?
Let's put all that down today.
And if you need to take some labels off yourself so you can move forward and be all that God has made you to be, we have an amazing prayer team.
I'm sure they would love to pray those things off you and help you to get free and see yourself as God sees you.
Each one of you is so loved and each so precious and each so unique.
Never compare yourself to someone else.
Be the true person that God has made you to be and who knows what God will do with you.
Let's pray.
Lord God, we thank you so much that you love us so much, that you have good plans for us.
Lord, that you see beyond the labels.
You see beyond what people have said over us over the years.
You see us as you made us.
Lord, I just pray that each person here this morning will be able to leave their labels behind, leave their past behind and step into the stories that you have for them in Jesus' name.
Amen.